Hey everyone and thanks for jumping back
into the cryptoverse.
Today we're going to be discussing
asymmetrical tail curvature in Bitcoin
price quantiles. If you guys like the
content, make sure you subscribe to the
channel, give the video a thumbs up, and
also check out the sale on Into the
Cryptoverse Premium at into the
cryptoverse.com.
The sale's ending in a few days. Let's
go ahead and jump in. So, there's been a
lot of model development in Bitcoin over
the last decade, and we're going to
provide a brief review of that. And then
we're going to talk a little bit about
this model, what it does better, what it
doesn't do better, and and also give
credit where credit is due, frankly. So,
let's talk about how we got here to this
model that I'll probably start using
some on the channel. The first thing I
will say is this is that all models are
wrong and some are useful and every
model eventually
starts to wayne from the original,
you know, from the original fit, right?
It doesn't always hold up over a long
period of time. But while all models are
wrong, some are useful and some are a
lot more useful than others. Now, it all
started arguably with a Bitcoin talk
post. Uh, I think his name was Trolo,
something like that. And he posted this
rainbow chart. Now, this was posted a
long time ago. Um, and it was one of I
think it was the first if I'm not
mistaken. I could be wrong, but I think
this was one of the first ones posted.
And it's essentially a rainbow chart.
And one of the things that you'll notice
is that the price of Bitcoin at the
peaks tends to fall down. Like you see
how every cycle it doesn't go up as high
into the regression bands. Like every
single cycle it doesn't go up quite as
high. And that was one of the things
that, you know, I've talked about before
with the regression rainbow that that we
have on uh on Trading View, but it was
something that wasn't really fully
captured. Okay. So, there's this model
and then I think I I and again, I could
be wrong, but I I did the best I could
in and looking at the different models.
Giovani, I think a lot of people are
pretty familiar with the power law. Um,
and I'm going to link, you know, I'll
link the stuff in the description of the
video. So, if you want to go check out
any of these models, you can do that.
Giovani has a YouTube channel and I will
also link that as well. And he has a
video called the Bitcoin Power Law
Theory. I would encourage you to go
watch it um because he'll, you know, he
really starts to talk about where this
stuff comes from. Okay.
And I think this one was next in about
2018 if I'm not mistaken. I think he
maybe talked about it before 2018, but
the earliest like threads I could find
on Reddit were 2018, but that doesn't
mean that there weren't some threads
before then. And so then there's the
power law theory, power law model, which
structurally at the lower tail does a
pretty good job. does a pretty good job
at the lower tail.
And then that was in 2018 and ongoing,
you know, ongoing work since then. And
then in 2019, 2020,
I put together
this model.
And basically what this model was was
the idea of it was essentially fitting
the different
quantiles. Essentially this was back in
I think this indicator was published
back in 2020 I believe. I believe it was
2020.
And the idea was if we fit the data to
the lower quantile
versus the upper one like basically
fitting it to data in that like that 1%
quantile versus the 99%
what do you get and we got this chart
but I didn't actually fill in all the
ones in between but you can see how the
curvature
is different, right? You can see how the
curvature is different between the two
curves. And I was essentially trying to
capture the fact
that the rainbow chart
was using the same curve, right? It was
using the same curve to predict both the
lower tail and the upper tail.
But you can clearly see that they have
different curvature. the lower tail, the
structural support is a m does a much
better job of actually finding the lows
and even that sometimes breaks down,
right? Like originally, you know, you
can see that it was holding up in the
blue one and then as the cycles went on,
then it went down into the purple one
and even went below the purple one last
cycle. So even that one is a little
optimistic and you can see how every
cycle it kind of drifts. the highs
aren't as high into the regression band
and then the lows are are starting to go
a little bit lower into the regression
band. But again, when these were fitted
all those years ago, I mean, it did a
pretty good job, right? Because I think
this was fitted well before the 2017
peak. So, this model was not a failure.
In fact, it's one of the, you know, the
the the best models that we've had on
Bitcoin for a long time. And a lot of
work was inspired by this one.
It's just that when you fit the data and
you only have like one cycle of data to
fit, it's not going to be able to
predict what happens 20 years later
because markets change and you just
don't have enough data.
So
Giovani came along, right, with the
power law. And I think that does a
better job than the rainbow chart,
right? I think it it does a better job.
Structurally, it does a pretty good job
of of finding the lows, but the last
couple of cycles it h like the price of
Bitcoin hasn't really gone to the highs.
Now, I don't think the power law, it
doesn't state that it has to go to the
highs, right? It doesn't say that it has
to go there. It just says that these
would be the bounds at a point in time
if it were to go there. But it again, I
don't think it it hasn't hit those
higher bands uh for at least two cycles,
I believe.
And so after that,
I put out this model to try to capture
some of the curvature.
And I I don't know if you guys remember,
maybe the only the people that'll
remember are the are the OGs, but back
then I referred to the lower quantile as
quote unquote nonbubble data. So when I
selected it, it was not a mathematically
rigorous way to do it, right? It was
more dubious speculation. It was not
mathematically rigorous, but the idea
was there. Okay. And then after that
I put out the regression rainbow. Right?
And the idea
was to kind of show how every cycle we
kind of drop a few regression bands. All
right? Now that gets you through 2020.
Now there was other models developed as
well, right? like stock to flow was put
out I believe in 2019, but that's been
pretty optimistic of a of a model and
and we haven't really hit those extremes
um of of the stock toflow model. And
then not too long ago,
there was a person named the real plan C
and he's he's on Twitter. I don't know
if he's on YouTube, but I I think he I
know he's on Twitter. And so I would
recommend following both Helm and
Giovani because, you know, there's a lot
of
there's a lot of hype in the space and I
feel like there's a lot of stuff that's
not really based on data or rigorous
mathematical proofs or anything like
that. And so, you know, it's easy to put
out a model that is just going to call
for Bitcoin to go to like $10 million.
And, you know, you can go to a Bitcoin
conference and hear everyone giving
these like $30 million price predictions
as their bearish target. And I mean,
like, that's great and all, but do we
want that or do we want something that's
like realistic?
And
I I think that the power law has been
struck. the hit is it has worked for a
while in terms of the lower tail like
showing you kind of where those lows
form. It's not I mean I'm not saying it
it it it always perfectly gets
everything right, but I mean I think it
is a a fairly mathematically sound model
to to kind of understand what Bitcoin is
doing. And so the real plan C he put out
a a quantile model which basically was
it just kind of showed all the different
quantiles of you know of the price. Um
sort of like a like a like a rainbow
chart but he then also introduced I
think this like exponential decay
function in the upper tail
uh as well. And again, you can go to his
Twitter page and you can read all about
that and I will link that all in the
description below. So, a lot of the
work, you know, sort of like builds off
each other. You have you have the the
regression rainbow. You have the power
law. You have sort of the regression
fits to the the lower quantile and the
higher quantile. You have the full
quantile framework. Um, and I think they
all do a pretty good job of of trying to
kind of explain what's going on. And
what I wanted to do was basically come
back to this idea of asymmetric tail
curvature and I wanted to do it in a
mathematically rigorous way. Okay, I
wanted to do it in a mathematically
rigorous way. So,
what I did was I
Let me just pull the model up. So, this
is what it looks like. Okay. And what
we're going to do is we're going to
first hide the golden bands down at the
bottom. Okay. And and we'll get to those
in a little bit. This is what the model
looks like. Okay. This is what the model
looks like right now.
This
at the lows at the lows
is no better than the original power law
model. No better. Okay. Um in fact the
power law model works just fine at the
lower structural support and it has for
a while. Okay. So no better there.
Where I think this model provides
a little bit of
intrigue is the upper tail
because the upper tail is what has been
so hard to capture for a lot of
different models. a lot of models,
including the power law model, like
they'll show you how high the price of
Bitcoin could go. And I think for the
power law, it was in like, you know,
200,000 or something like that. It
wasn't as bullish as some of the crazy
price predictions. And and again, the
power law doesn't say that this is where
it has to go, but it did sort of call
for, you know, some of those higher
higher levels. And and so the argument
is is well is there a way to fit the
upper tail
in a mathematically rigorous way
separate from the lower tail? And that's
what it does. So it groups it. You have
one group in the lower tail
and that has one curvature and then the
upper tail has a different curvature.
And what it captures is the fact that
you're converging.
That's essentially what's happening.
You're having these massive moves, but
as time goes on, you're converging. Do
you see what I'm saying?
It's actually quite beautiful when you
think about it.
So what's happening is the power law
structural support
has remained sound
remain it's remained sound you know so
far that doesn't mean it always will but
it has so far
and
the upper tail
the peaks are diminishing the the
euphoria excess S is getting a little
bit less each time. So what's happening
is they're converging to each other.
Right? You see this? Like once upon a
time
they were pretty wide apart, but as time
goes on
they're converging towards each other.
So you're not you're not getting the
same type of explosive moves. You still
get them, but they're not like what they
used to be. But the support level
continues to rise.
So I think it's an interesting thing. Um
and it and again it sort of builds off
this model of the regression bands,
right? Like it's not if you look at it
compared to the regression bands. This
one was published like six or seven
years ago. It's not that different in
terms of the idea. The fit is different
but we have more data. Like the fit is
different. We just have more data. But
you can see that it's not that different
in terms of the idea. Okay. So um
from here
if we go into
each one right now you can see that we
are at the 9.4
percentile.
Meaning throughout all of history,
Bitcoin has only spent about 9% of its
time below the current quantile. Only
about 9% of the time. I'm just trying to
make sure I get I'm just trying to make
sure I get all these things exactly
right because it's a lot. I mean, if you
guys want to read the paper that I wrote
for it, this is what it looks like.
Okay? And it's a long paper. I you know
if you if you want to go take a look you
can uh it's on the website bjamincan.com
and you can go to the reports and look
at asymmetric tail curvature in bitcoin
price quantiles and it goes through all
the mathematical rigor we talk about
some of the other models some of the
ways in which those models are better
some of the ways in which this one is it
might be might be useful um so I would
say go check it out if you want a little
bit of light reading before bedtime
Um so the bands of this model can bend
right they can bend they can converge
towards each other
and
this basically uses a post estimation
rearrangement um and it's an
unconstrained fit so there there's no
you know the fit itself is not
constrained in any you know in any way
in that sense so what I want to do now
is talk a little bit about where we
So if you zoom in here, the lower
quantile, the 1% quantile
is at around 62K.
And I will double click this and I will
add in price labels so you can see what
I'm talking about. So the current
quantile Q1 is at 62K.
That doesn't mean Bitcoin can't go below
it. What it means is that historically,
Bitcoin has only spent 1% of its time
below that quantile. 1% of its time. It
doesn't mean it can't go below it. It
just means it doesn't go below it. When
it does go below it, it hasn't
historically gone below it for that
long.
So, we have to be careful about how we
like define things, right?
If you say that Q1 is always support,
well, look at what happened in 2022,
right? It went slightly below it. in
2020. You can see it like went slightly
below it. And again, there's there's
different models you can use to sort of
look at this stuff. Um,
but what I wanted to do was capture some
of the dislocation events that have
happened. And those dislocation events,
in this case, I'm just referring to
anytime Bitcoin has gone below Q1, the
first the the 1 percentile.
And there's four main times in history.
Really, there's like maybe you could
argue more in some of these wicks, but
four main times in history, okay? And if
you go into the fit, you can see the
different dislocations that occurred,
and we're going to add those back on.
So, the the most recent dislocation was
in 2022 where the price went a little
below that first quantile.
in terms of a price or in terms of like
a a distance below it, you know, we have
it exactly in the paper, but you can
Sorry, that was not that's not from the
one that's from like the five or 10
about, you know, five or 6% below it.
So, what we wanted to say, what we
wanted to show is if Bitcoin were to go
to the quantile it went to in 2022,
what would the price be
today? What would it be today? If
Bitcoin were go to the same quantile
that it was in in late 2022,
it would put the price at around 57 to
58,000
today. Okay. So, if Bitcoin were to drop
to 58K,
then that would essentially correspond
to where it dropped in terms of its
quantiles back in 2022. Now, there's
other models you can use, right? This is
not like a a perfect model that that
supersedes all prior ones. This is just
a different model. It's just different.
It it doesn't it's not necessarily
better at the lower bounds. In fact, at
the lower bounds, again, the simple
power law does just fine. But I'm just
run we're just running with this model
right now for the lower bounds and we'll
talk about the upper bounds.
That's the 2022 one. If you go back to
the pandemic, it went lower, right? It
went lower. And you if you zoom in, you
can see it went all the way down to this
quantile down here in March of 2020. And
now that quantile
today, let's just say what would where
would the price of Bitcoin be if it went
to the quantile it went to during the
pandemic? What would that be?
It'd be about 51K. 51 to 52K. All right.
Okay. Now, keep going back because
there's another one.
This is the most egregious one. This was
the one we got in 2015 where in 2015 on
some exchanges, Bitcoin actually went
below where it was in January 2015. So
you had the bare market year, you went
sideways and you basically had a double
bottom. That double bottom,
what quantile, where did it go? Where
did it go? It went right here. It was
about 35% below the below Q1. It was a
pretty big drop. And you know what 2015
had?
It was a recession scare. A lot of
people probably don't remember, we
didn't get a recession, but there was a
pretty big scare. We were going to have
one.
What price would that correspond to
today?
Today that would correspond roughly to
around 48K. 48 to 49K.
All right. And actually that one's only
that one's not 35. It's 22% below.
The only other one, and this one I'm not
convinced we should use,
but if you go all the way back to August
of 2010, I'm not even I'm not even going
to dare include this one because this is
like 50% down. But August 2010, there
was a pretty big wick down.
It was probably an illlquid wick. That
doesn't really mean anything
if we're being honest, right? But I
wasn't trading Bitcoin back then. I
don't know for sure exactly what that
was. So just for completeness,
we've added it
and you can see that that one would
currently correspond to about 40K. So
you have
the regression bands that there the
quantiles, but it's an asymmetric
quantile fit. The upper tail is fit
differently than the lower tail,
which is kind of what we did six years
ago with this model.
But the main difference between six
years ago and now is that this one was
not mathematically rigorous or
mathematically sound. It was more so me
just eyeballing it and fitting it. This
one is more rigorous
and sound, the one we have now. Now,
again, that doesn't mean it can't break,
right? I mean, yeah, if we were to go
into some massive global recession, then
this model could easily break. I mean,
it's not like Bitcoin's ever experienced
a prolonged major crash in the stock
market. So, again, there's no guarantee
that this model will stand the test of
time. In fact, it probably won't, right?
In fact, it probably won't given a a
long enough period of time. Now, let's
talk about the upper quantile. And this
is where I think there are some
advantages over some of the other models
because in this case you can see the
euphoric
parts. Now you might say, well hold on a
second. It wasn't euphoric
in the last bull market, but we know
that it wasn't. We know that Bitcoin
topped on apathy. And we know the only
time in history it topped on apathy
was 2019, 2 months before quantitative
tightening ended. So, if you were to
overlay interest rates onto the chart,
you'll see how in 2019
when QT ended and and interest rates
started to drop, that is where Bitcoin
topped out at. See right here where
interest rates started to drop, didn't
drop the first time, but now what we're
going to do is we're going to overlay
QT, the balance sheet of the Fed. We're
not going to overlay, we're just going
to overlay the balance sheet of the Fed.
What you'll see is that Bitcoin topped
out two months before the bet the Fed's
balance sheet started going back up,
just like it did in 2025.
So in 2019, Bitcoin topped in June.
Quantitative tightening ended in August.
And there was no rotation from Bitcoin
to altcoins. 2025, the same thing.
Bitcoin topped in October. QT ended in
December. Two months later, no rotation
from Bitcoin to altcoins.
Okay?
And guess what? They both topped out.
They both topped out
at the 75% quantile give or take. A
little above both times,
but you can see neither time did they go
to the 95th to 99th percentile.
So, if you have sat around wondering why
there was no rotation into altcoins, why
there was no quote unquote alt season,
the reason was because of monetary
policy in my opinion and and how and
also because a lot of them are a lot of
them all coins are just simply scams and
and people are tired of losing their
money in the space frankly. But from a
non-judgment perspective, just from like
a a mathematical macro perspective, the
reason why it didn't happen was because
of monetary policy. And the reason
without including monetary policy that
there was no alt season was because
Bitcoin never became euphoric because it
topped out before getting to the 95th
percentile.
You see that the rotation into alts
happens durably more durably after
Bitcoin goes past that 95th percentile
which did not happen in this past cycle
or in the midcycle peak of the cycle
before that.
So
that doesn't mean that Bitcoin can't go
back up there. There is an argument to
be had that
this top here corresponds to this top
right there in 2019. Right? So if that's
true
then where we are right now where we are
right now is in this phase. And you can
see that once that phase ended we did go
back up to the higher quantile. Right?
We did,
but not before resetting, right? Not
before resetting. Now, I'm not here to
suggest that we have to go all the way
back down in terms of the quantiles
exactly to where we were in the
pandemic. But what I am saying is that
midterm years are normally when the
markets reset. And every cycle, every
cycle so far, at some point, Bitcoin did
go below the first percentile. In the
2018 cycle, it didn't happen until 2020
when we went below it. Last cycle, it
happened in the midterm year where we
went below it. Cycle before that, it
happened in the preh havinging year.
So, you can see that it's happened every
cycle. It's just hard to know when in
every cycle it's going to happen.
So I I want people to sort of keep this
model in mind not as
you know a a perfect way to capture the
Bitcoin price. I think there's a lot of
models that do a good job. I think the
power law model does a good good job. Um
you know I think plan C what he's
working on the real plan C on Twitter I
think what he's working on with his
quantile work does a pretty good job.
This is just another mathematical
framework that tries to capture in a
mathematically rigorous way without any
bias or anything like that
the fact that the upper tail
is different than the lower tail
and that you don't have to eyeball it.
You can just run the calculations and
it'll spit this out for you. Okay.
So, I I guess what I would maybe refer
to this area down here, this golden
band, I'd probably say that's like the
golden pocket of Bitcoin. Whenever it
goes there, it's been a incredible time
to buy. Whenever it goes there, but it
doesn't go there very frequently, right?
It doesn't go there very frequently. If
you look at the time between when it's
gone there, between say 2015 and the
next one, it was about 238 weeks and
then the next one after that was about
139.
We're currently at around 185. So, you
know, we're kind of in between the last
two in terms of how long it took to get
back down there. So, I just want to put
this on your radar. I want you to
imagine a future for the rest of the
midterm year where we know Bitcoin could
stay weak through the midterm year like
it normally does. If later this year
you're looking at Bitcoin and it's below
say Q1
and it's late midterm year, just
consider that maybe this time's not
different. Maybe Bitcoin's just
bottoming at the end of the midterm year
like it normally does and perhaps
that'll be a good accumulation target,
accumulation window as we go. hopefully
into the next Bitcoin bull market. So in
this indicator, I also want to just
quickly show these are the having lines,
right? So you can see kind of like where
the havingss are. And then also um I
know people are going to ask this, so
I'll go ahead and add it. We have a sort
of this endofear price table. And and
this basically just shows every price
for every quantile at the end of each
year.
That's all it shows. Okay. Going to
2050.
And so for Q1 into 2025, it was like
54K.
So obviously people want to know how
long does it take to reach a million. I
put out a video back in 2020, I believe
it was, saying when will Bitcoin reach a
million and back then I suggested around
2040. If you want to go watch that
video, I will link it down in the
description below.
If you look here, Q1, when does Q1, the
first percentile reach a million?
2041.
But maybe we hit it sooner because
that's just the first percentile.
You can see that the 50th percentile
says 2036.
The point is is, you know, whenever it
happens, it's probably going to take
longer than people think. It's probably
not going to happen next cycle. Probably
won't happen the cycle after that either
because next cycle gets you to 2029.
cycle after that gets you to 2033. And
in order for it to hit a million by
2033,
you'd basically be looking at which
percentile here?
Yeah, there's none of the percentiles
show it by 2033. The earliest one, the
99th percentile, the earliest would be
2035.
Okay.
So,
this was just an idea, you know, I
during this recent rally that Bitcoin
has had over the last few months, um,
one of the ways that I spent my time,
um, other than, you know, being with the
newborn in the wee hours of the night
trying to work on on on this and just,
you know, saying, "Look, I'm Not
claiming this model is better than other
models. I'm not. At the lower tail, it's
not. It it it doesn't do a better job
than just the base power law model. But
at the upper tail, I think it might be
somewhat helpful in terms of identifying
the highs, right?
in a euphoric rally. In a non-uporic
rally like what we just got and in what
we got in 2019, you can see when that
happens, you then end up topping out at
around that 75th percentile, maybe a
little bit higher in both cases, not 95
or 99. So again, if you want to read
about this, I'll link it in the
description below. You can go read about
it. I will also link um you know the
other models as well. The the the
rainbow chart, the work by Giovani, the
work by Plan C all do a great job and
all are are not hype just presenting the
work as the math leads them to present
which that's the way we should do it.
And in a world of hype and
overpromising, we could all use a little
bit more of that. If you guys like the
content, make sure you subscribe to the
channel. Give the video a thumbs up and
I'll see you guys next time. Bye.